# Lecture 1

#### Introduction
We will be studying programming languages and how programs run on operating systems.

## Notes
Programs use two resources: **time** and **space** (cores, etc.)

### Space
A **bit** is a single binary value, 1 or 0.

If a bit has a value of one, we call it **set**.

A group of 8 bit is a **bit**. Raw storage is an array of these bytes.

Bytes are grouped into **words** of 2/4/8 bytes to represent larger values, etc.

### Time
Digital logic is **clocked**

A single clock **cycle** is under one nanosecond.

Fast local networks transmit it microseconds.

### Unix/Linux Programming Environment
A **shell** receives commands   

**Commands** decide which program should run.

### C
C is a **compiled** language.

Machine code ends up in an **executable file** 

C constructs are represented as machine **instructions** (ASM)

### Development
**VSCode** to write code

**make** invokes **gcc** to compile C programs

**gdp** is our debugger

**valgrind** helps debug memory errors

**Git** using GitLab

### Hello world in C
```c
#include <stdio.h>

main()
{
    printf("hello, world\n");
}
```

C code calls helper routines (functions) in the **standard runtime library**, **libc**.

Process interacts with the outside world via **system calls** to eh **OS kernel** 

**System calls** to the *system* libc routine invokes shell commands

### Abstractions
OS kernel launches an executable program file as a **process** as requested by a **parent** program (shell, gradescope, etc.)

### Course postconditions
Understand hoe programs, written in high-level programming languages, runon real machines and operating systems.

Understand programming languages concepts in C (types, operators, etc.) and the surrounding ecosystem (compiler, linker, debugger)

Understand the role of the OS

Implement non-trivial programs in C that interact with details of the underline machine architecture.

Understand factors that impact performance and resource efficiency.

**NOTE:** *Dive into Systems* recommended reference book.

### Grades
Drop lowest two labs and a discussion.

Quizzes are not graded, but are recommended for self-assessment.

10% reduction per day for the first two days of late work. Then 0.

No curve.
