# Lecture 10 - Code as Bits pt.3
## Review

---

**NOTE:** You know that an assembly instruction is addressing memory by the 
presence of parenthesis `( )` around a register. This is **indirect 
addressing** 

---

The only time that parentheses aren't used for indirect addressing is the 
`lea` opcode.

**Instruction size specifiers:** 
- `b` is a single byte
- `w` is a 2-byte word
- `l` is a 4-byte long
- `q` is an 8-byte quadword

This is strange because in C, a `long` is 8-bytes, so we would use `q` and 
not `l`.

---

**NOTE:** Read up on `lea` instructions in ASM. It will be a focus on the exam.
In `lea`, the destination argument must be a register, and the source must be
an address expression.

---

## Conditions/Control Flow
A **conditional branch** jumps somewhere if a condition is true. An
**unconditional branch** jumps somewhere without checking a condition first.

An x64 CPU keeps four **condition code** flag bits internally. They are:
- `CF`is the *carry flag* 
- `ZF` is the *zero flag* 
- `SF` is the *sign flag* 
- `OF` is the *overflow flag* 

Condition codes are set *implicitly* by arithmetic instructions as a side-effect
of the operation.

---

**NOTE:** Condition codes *are never set by* `lea`.

---

We can also *explicity* set the conditions code by the **compare instruction** 
`cmp` or **test instruction** `test`.

Using `cmp`: `cmpq src1, src2` sets condition codes based on `src2 - src1` but
it *does not store the value.*  

### Jumping
**Jumping**  is performed with `j*` instructions. There is a table of these 
instructions on the x64 cheat sheet on the course website.

A **jump** instruction changes the program counter `%rip`. This is also called a
**branch** because control heads off in a different direction.

---

**NOTE:** `%rip` tells the CPU the address of the next instruction to execute

---

**Labels** give us a way to refer to a specific instruction in our assembly code

Each *use* of a label is eventually replaced (by the linker) with the address of
the associated instruction.

C allows `goto` as a means of transferring control (similar to jumping), but it
is considered bad coding style.

