# Lecture 11 - Conditional Control Flow
In ASM , `je` jumps if equal to zero.

The `test` idiom sets condition codes based on the value in `%rax`

`jmp` is an unconditional jump

A **jump table** is a constant array of target locations that is created by the
assembler. Each element contains the address of a code block, and when the ASM
code wants to jump to any of those locations, they are searched in the **jump
table**.

A good analogy for a jump table is the **case/switch** statement, where each
case is a location in code, and the jump table fills with the location of each
case.

The syntax for using the jump table in ASM is `jmp *.L4(,%rdi,8)`, where `*`
indicates an indirect jump through a computed address.

## Procedure Calls
`callq` is a **special jump** to the first instruction of `Q`.

`retq` is a special jump back to the caller and is *indirect*.

Not every procedure/function needs space for temporary variables. If such space
*is* required, a **stack frame** is used, and is then filled with variables.

`%rsp` is the **stack pointer register**, and is the address of the top element
of the stack.

The two main instructions for the stack are **push** and **pop**.

The instruction for pushing to the stack is `pushq` (i.e. `pushq %rcx` stores 
contents of top of stack into `%rcx` and asjusts `%rsp`)

`callq` stores the current value of `%rip` on the stack before shifting to 
inside the procedure. That way, when `retq` is called at the end of that 
procedure, it knows where to jump to.

