# Lecture 14 - Arrays and Buffer Overflow
## Retroactive exam review
The addresses of variables in a struct are in the order of declaration in that
struct. They are default aligned based on their size. For *arrays*, this is 
based on the element size. 

Padding is inserted between variables to maintain alignment.

## Memory management
A **buffer** is a block of memory used to store some data.

A **buffer overflow** condition exists when a program writes or operates on a
buffer irrespective of its size.

A **buffer overflow vulnerability** is a flaw that enables an attacker to 
cause a buffer overflow.

### Stack Smash
The stack grows down, but a buffer grows *up*. Thus, if we overflow the buffer,
it can overflow data in the stack. Choosing the right inputs, an attacker can
choose which data to alter, to include return addresses etc.

### Remote Code Execution (RCE)
Here, an attacker injects/runs attack code on the victim. This allows the 
attacker to "take over" and reprogram the victim.

## Bleeds
A **bleed** reads beyond the bounds of a buffer instead of writing past those
bounds like a stack smash. This causes unauthorized access to data.

## Defenses for stack smash
OS's disable execute privledges on stack pages. This means any branch to code on
the stack raises a fault. This is **NX (no-execute)**.

**Address Space Layout Randomization (ASLR)** places the stack randmly in the
virtual address space. Attackers must guess a branch target of the injected code.
ASLR changes it on each program launch, making it harder to guess.

**Stack canaries** are compiler-generated instructions to place a random value on
the stack above RA.
