# Lecture 15 - Build, Link, Load, Launch
## Relocation table
The **relocation table** holds a list of entities of that need *patching* by the
linker. These include any instruction that references a global symbol (label,
static data, etc.) and any item whose value is the address of a global symbol (
i.e. jump table).

The linker has to patch each such reference to have the correct address/offset
for the references symbol once the symbol's runtime location is assigned.

There is only one relocation table entry *per reference*.

To view a relocation table, use `objdump -r object_file_name.o` in the terminal.

To view dissasembly, use `objdump -d object_file_name.o` in the terminal. The
combination of relocation and disassembly is often used together.

Often time, `nm object_file_name.o` is easier to digest with its cleaner output.

## Dynamic linking
**Dynamic linking** (shared libraries) can take place when an executable is first
loaded to run (load-time linking). It can also take place after a program has
started executing (run-time linking). Both of these approaces rely on relocation
information and patching!

## Loader
The loader's input is an executable binary progranm and command line arguments.
For example, `./a.out arg1 arg2`. Its output is the running of the program.

The loader sets up memory sections (instructions, static data, stack) and 
initializes registers.

Loader duties are primarily handled but the OS/kernel ("exec").

## System-level control flow
There are different types of control flow:
- control flow
- exceptional control flow
- asynchronous exceptions (interrupts)
- synchronous exceptions (traps & faults)

So far, we've seen how the flow of control changes as a *single program* executes.
In reality, multiple programs are running *concurrently*.

**Exceptional control flow** is a basic mechanism used for:
- transferring control between processes and OS
- handling I/O and *virtual memory* within the OS
- Implementing multi-process apps like shells and web servers
- Implementing concurrency

Normally, a program changes control flow in reaction to changes in *program state*
but we also need to react to changes in *system states* like using `Ctrl+C` for
stopping a program in the terminal even when the program isn't looking for input
from the terminal.

