# Lecture 16 - Exceptions and Processes
An **Operating system** is a body of software that *multiplexes* the hardware
resources, *abstracts* the hardware platform, and *protects* software principals
from each other (using hardware)

An **exception** is a change in a processor's control flow in response to a
system event (i.e., change in system state, user-generated interrupt).

### The OS Kernel
The **kernel** is a special program in memory. It is compiles and linked
differently because it's running on the bare CPU, not on the OS.

The kernel code and data reside in a fixed and protected range of virtual 
addresses called the **kernel space**.

---

**NOTE:** Users cannot access the kernel space.

---

The **execution mode** is tracked by a special CPU core register. It designates
whether code is running in *user mode* or *kernel mode*.

**In kernel mode, a CPU can:**
- access the kernel space
- access certain control registers
- execute certain special instructions
- interact with attached hardware devices

### Types of exceptional control flow
*Traps (system calls)* are intentional and caused by an instruction.

*Faults/Aborts* are also synchronous (caused by an instruction), but are
unintentional.

*Software interrupts* are caused by some non-instruction event, but are 
intentional.

*Interrupts* are similarly caused by a non-instruction event, but are 
unintentional. Effectively, this is when a hardware device says "something has
occurred that you (the OS) should care about."

## Machine Exceptions
An **exception** causes a transfer of control to the OS kernel in response to 
some *event*.

When an *event* happens, we jump from user code to kernel code, change the
processor mode, handle the exception with an *exception handler*, then passes 
back into user mode/code.

### Exception tables
An *exception table* is effectively a jump table for machine exceptions. Each
type of event has a unique exception number `k` that is an index into the
exception table.

Handler `k` is called each time exception `k` occurs, similarly to a `switch`
statement. 

## Synchronous control flow
**Syncronous** exeptions are caused by events that occur as a result of executing
an instruction.

**Examples of synchronous exceptions**:
- **Traps**: intentional, transfer control to the OS to perform some function.
System calls are a type of trap that are hugely common.
- **Faults**: unintentional, but *possibly* recoverable.
- **Aborts**: unintentinal and *always* un-recoverable.

Similary to *exception tables*, there is a *system call (syscall)* table that 
maps various system calls to unique ID numbers.

## Scheduling
By default, when a program is loaded, it put in *ready state*. It is only put into
*running state* when prompted by the **scheduler**.

A process is put in *blocking state* when waiting for a hardware I/O operation 
like reading from memory. When finished with that I/O, a program is returned to 
the *ready state*

## Asynchronous interrupts
**Asynchronous interrupts** are cause by events external to the processor. After
the interrpt handler runs, *the handler returns to the "next" instruction*.

Async interrupts include hitting `Ctrl-C` in the terminal, clicking a mouse,
tapping a touchscreen, etc.

## Entering the kernel:
1. CPU event occurs (trap, fault, interrupt)
2. Core transitions to *kernel mode*
3. The PC `%rip` is set to execute a pre-designated handler routing for that
event type via the exception table.
4. Set the SP `%rsp` to the pre-designated kernel stack.

The stack mentioned in step 4 above is a separate stack from the one we are used
to, and is stored exclusively in kernel space. 
