# Lecture 17 - Storage Tech and Locality
## Blocks
**Blocks** are chunks of data storage of arbitrary size of size `2^n`.

**To use a block:**
1. Take the low *b* bits of a *byte address* as an integer.
2. That number is the *offset* of the addressed byte in the block.
3. The rest of the bits are the *block number* `x`.
4. Look up/request block number `x` as an unsigned long.
5. Extract the requested byte at offset in block `x`: `block[offet]`

## Performance Metrics
**Access time** (aka "latency") is how long it takes to complete a write.

**Throughput** (aka "bandwidth") is data per time or operations per time.

For any device that can only perform one operation at a time, access time and
throughput are inversely related.

## RAM
**Features:**
- basic storage unit is a **cell**
- Address and data widths
- ~ constant time to access any location
- usually packaged as a chip

RAM comes in two variants: **SRAM** and **DRAM**. SRAM is faster to access, but
DRAM has larger capacity (Gb vs. Mb)

Both SRAM and DRAM are **volitile**, meaning they lose their contents when they 
lose power.

**Non-volitile memory** has obvious upsides since it maintains through power loss,
but most systems use both volitile and non-volitile memory.

## Disks
### Hard Disk Drives (HDD)
These are *not* random-access. Access time depends on the location in memory.

**Parts of a hard disk:**
- The plates that makes up the actual memory are **platters**.
- The platters spin around a central **spindle**.
- There is one **arm** per platter, each with two **heads** for reading data
above and below the arm.

Each platter has two *surfaces*, one on top and one on bottom.

Each surface contains concentric rings called **tracks** that are grouped in
**sectors**.

A **sector** is a set of bytes and a **block** is a sequence of sectors.

**Capacity**, or the maximum number of bits that can be stored, is determined by
*recording density*, *track density*, and *areal density*.

### Read/write performance
There are three times that are relevent to judging disk read/write performance:
1. **Seek time**: time to move the arm/head over the target track.
2. **Rotation time**: time to wait for disk to rotate under head
3. **Transfer time**: time to transfor sector data to/from disk

Ultimately, the bottleneck in HDD performance is dominated by *seek* and 
*rotation* times.

## Locality
The **principle of locality**: programs tend to use data and instructions with
addresses near or equal to those they have used recently

**Temporal locality**: recently referenced items are likely to be referenced
again in the near future.

**Spacial locality**: items with nearby addresses tend to be referenced close 
together in time.

With arrays, **stride** is a sequence of data accesses. A sequence has stride
`k` when each access is `k` elements from the prior access. A stride of `1` is
equivalent to *sequential access*.

