# Lecture 18 - Caching
**CPU caches** are built-in fast memory that stores copies of instructions or
data from commonly referenced ("hot") locations.

**I/O caches** are software that keeps copies of recently-used data.

Cache **levels** describe the comparitive speed/storage/cost of different types
of caches. Higher up the "pyramid" is faster but more expensive and smaller. We
say that *level k* is faster/smaller than *level k+1*.

A pool of storage as big/cheap as the bottom layer and as fast as the top layer
most of the time would be ideal. To approach this, we use a *heirarchy*.

### Heirarchies
Data "warms" as they are "touched. "Warm" blocks rise up the heirarchy for faster 
access as colder blocks sink. 

Programs tend to "touch" the same thing near its last touch, hence maintaining
*temporal locality*.

Let level `k` cache blocks of size `2^b` bytes. Is block `x` one of them? First,
we extraxt block `b` from `x` and index level `k` for block `b`. If there's a
*hit*, block `b` warms.

## Associativity
Cache is an array of **sets**, each holding `1 + set size` blocks.

**Direct mapped:** each block has one set/slot

**N-way set associative**: each block has a single set, but has `N` possible slots
in that set.

**Fully associative:** each block can go anywhere (`N` is total cache size).

## Lookup
**Question:** How do we determine the set of a given block/

**Answer:** First, we map block number `b` into Set Index `s` and Tag `t`. Both of
these are functions of the block number `b`. The Tag must uniquely identifies a
block within a given set. A common pattern decomposes bits of a block number. This
is typical for hardware because it's so fast.

We lookup `x` by searching set `s` for a valid block whose tag matches `t`. This
is simple for direct-mapped caches since there's only one set/slot to check. No 
index is needed for fully associative caches: there's one set to check for all
tags.

---

### Direct-mapped cache (Set Size = 1)
Suppose cache has capacity `C` in blocks.

Consider a read for `x`:
- Map function assigns each `b` to slot index `s`.
- Direct: if `b` is resident (hit) &rarr; must be in its slot `s`.
- Miss: if slot `s` is instead occupied by block `v`, then evict `v`, fetch `b`
from the next level, and cache `b` into now-empty slot `s`.

Got capacity `C` blocks = `2^s`, use low-order `s` bits of block number as index.

The **valid bit** is a binary value that denotes whether or not an indexed 
set/slot/entry caches any block at all.

The **tag** denotes if an indexed set/slot/entry caches block number `x`.

## Cache misses
A **cold (compulsory) miss** occurs on the first request for each block. It always
happens because it can only be avoided by seeing the future.

**Capacity misses** occur if the set of blocks in active use (*working set*) does
not fit in the cache. A capacity miss occurs when an eviced block is later 
referenced again.

**Conflict misses** result from premature eviction of a warm block.

## Handling writes
First, we read the block, then modify the selected portion(s). The block is now
**dirty**, and must *push* to update copies below.

###  Replacement
In **direct-mapped caches**, replacement is simple: replace the item currently in
that place.

For **full- or set-associative**, replacement is less trivial. We need a policy to
pick items from `N` to replace.

#### Cache calculation:
Let us have a block size of 8 bytes with a cache capacity of 4 KiB:

**Question:** How many blocks can the cache hold?

**Answer:** We know that 4 KiB is `2^12` bytes. For 8 bytes, there are `2^3` 
bytes. The capacity is cache capacity divided by the block size, or `2^9 = 512`.

---

**Question:** How many bits wide is the block offset field?

**Answer:** The block offset size is `log_2(block size)`, which in this case is 
`3`.

---

**Question:** Which of the following address is in block number 3?: `0x3`, `0x1f`,
`0x30`, `0x38`?

**Answer:** First, we convert these to binary: `...0011`, `...011111`, 
`...0110000`, `...0111000`. Then, we convert our desired block number into 
binary. We know that our offset is 3 bytes, thus the last three bits are `b`. 
Stripping away the last three bits, the only given address that is 3 in binary is
`...011|111`, thus the answer is `0x1f`. (Notice that the lefthand side is the
block number in binary).

---

## Software Caches
Software caches have large time differences, especially when we are dealing with
remote lookups over networks.
