## Dynamic Memory Allocation
The allocator organizes the heap as a collection of variable-sized *blocks* that
are either *allocated* or *free*.

The `malloc` function allocated and the `free` function releases, or *frees* a
region of memory.

Applications may not try to access memory that has not been allocated and never
free memory that has not been allocated.

The *allocator* must respond immediately to `malloc` and only allocate memory 
that has not been previously allocated.

### Performance
**Performance goals:**
- given some sequence of `malloc` and `free` requests, maximize *throughput* and
*peak memory utilization*

**Throughput** is the number of completed requests per unit of time.

The **aggregate payload P_k**: `malloc(p)` results in a block with a *payload* of
`p` bytes. After a request `R` has completed, the *aggregate payload* is the sum
of currently allocated payloads.

### Fragmentation
Poor memory utilization is caused by **fragmentation**. Sections of memory are
not used to store anything useful, but cannot satisfy allocation requests.

**Internal fragmentation** is wasted space (padding) *inside* of the struct
between fields due to alignment.

**External fragmentation** is wasted space (padding) *between* struct instances
(e.g. in an array) due to alignment.

### Keeping tracks of free blocks
An **explicit list** maintains a list of *free* blocks, but not *all* blocks.

Normally, in practice, we use *first-fit* policy to as   sign new data to blocks of
memory. There, we iterate through the *free list* and place the data in the first
place where it will fit. (this is different than *best-fit* or *worst-fit*).

**Insertion policy** dictates where in the free list you put a newly freed block.

A *LIFO* insertion policy is simple and runs in constant time, but fragmentation
is worse than address-ordered policy, which is outside the scope of this course.

### Segregated free lists

A **segregated free list** has different free lists for different size classes.

Given an array of free lists, each one of some size class, to allocate a block
size `n`, we:
1. search appropriate free list for block size `m > n`
2. If appropriate block is found, split block and place fragment on appropriate
list (optional)
3. If no block is found, try next larger class
4. Repeat until success

To free a block, we *coalesce* and place it in the relevant free list.

## Project 6 notes
A **slab** is a larger set of contiguous blocks.

The `my_alloc`, `allocate_slab`, and `my_free` functions are the functions that
students need to complete.

