# Lecture 2 - From Java to C
**Buffers** are memory blocks (`char` arrays) to hold I/O data

#### C and Java share:
- basic data types
- functions/*procedures* 
- variables
- control structures

#### C doesn't have:
- operator ocerloading, overloading
- classes, objects, methods, `this`
- built in collection types (maps, lists, etc.)
- automatic memory management

## Types
Every value is an instance of a **type** 

Values are just bits, but the type tells us what operations we can use with them.

Values occupy **memory space** 

The amount of memory space that a value occupies depends on type and the machine/system that is running the program.

The C `sizeof` operator can give the size of a given value.

The `sizeof` operator returns a value of type `size_t`

## User-defined types
Combine base types to define **compound types**:
- Arrays
- Structs

Define a new type names with `typedef`
```C
typedef unsigned long size_t;
```

**Symbolic Constants** define constants and are good for "magic numbers" that you never want to change. Here, before the compiler even sees the code, all values of `MAGIC` are replaced with the int `1234`.
```C
#define MAGIC 1234
```

## Arrays and strings in C
Arrays:
```C
int myarray[24] // 24-integer long array
int smallset[3] = {0, 1, 2} // initialize and declare at the same time
float gpas[NUM_STUDENTS]; // defined with a constant
```

In C, strings are just arrays of `char`'s.

A **null terminator** is a "null" (0) value that marks the end of a string and occupies an element.

The character for a null terminator is `\0` and must be included

Strings:
```C
char myString[3]; // initialize only
char word[3] = {'h', 'i', '\0'} // declare and initialize with \0
```

## Structs
Instead of objects, C uses `struct` for record types.

Structs are similar to objects but contain no methods.

**Fields** in a struct can be any type.

## Functions
Functions are also called **procedures**, **routines**, and **subroutines**.

Arguments are passed **by value**

In C, functions must be declared before use.

You can build a **prototype** before the `main` function if you want to define a function later.

```C
int func(int a, int b); // prototype

void main() {
    // can call func() here
}

// actual function
int func(int a, int b) {
    return a+b;
}
```

## Variables
A **variable** is a namespace to store values, not the value itself

A variable is *not a value*, it *stores* a value.

Each variable has:
- type
- name
- scope
- location address
- lifetime

## Symbols
Each C symbol declaration/definition is either **internal** to a function or **external** (outside any { } )

**Scope** denotes the visibility of the identifier. 
- *Internal* -> **local** to a function
- *External* -> **global** 

**NOTE:** check table on slide 17 for more details on scope and lifetime.

## First C Program
```C
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    printf("Hello, world!\n");
    return 0;
}
```
Program starts in `main`

If there's no `main` function, it's not a program.

`main` takes optional arguments, but that's for future lectures.

**NOTE** return 0 if and only if the program "succeeds". **This is important for gradescope** 

The `#include` statements import header files.

Header files declare:
- types
- global variable symbols
- function symbols

`printf` is a procedure defined in the `libc` library that prints some output to `stdout`.

`man printf` shows header files to `#include` to declare it -- or for any `libc` routine.

## Expressions
**grammar** defines the set of legal expressions

Expressions specify **operations** and **operands** (E.g. `2 + 2 = 4`)

**Evaluation** of expressions occurs at runtime

Standard order of operations applies, including parenthesis.

## Things to watch for (buried rakes)
Non-zero values are `true`.

Zero is `false`

Incrementing with `++` works on both sides of a variable name. (e.g. `i++` or `++i`)

## C arrays
**Arrays** are indexed sequences of elements.

In C, arrays are fixed.

C doesn't always stop you if you go out of an array's bounds. It will just let you work in the next memory addresses arbitrarily (sometimes)

Arrays are 0-based, i.e. the first element is index 0.

The value of an array symbol without [ ] is the memory location of the first element of the array.

**NOTE** when creating a character array, don't forget to add an element for the null termination character.
