# Lecture 20 - Virtual Memory pt. 1

---

**NOTE:** Here, `PA` refers to physical addresses and `VA` to virtual addresses.
`Perm` refers to permissions

---

In smaller (usually embedded) systems, virtual memory isn't used. But on most
larger systems, virtual memory is required.

The **Memory Management Unit (MMU)** handles the conversion to and from virtual
address space to physical addresses.

Every process has its own **Address Space Identifier (ASID)**, which is then 
mapped to another map that is a key/value pair between virtual and physical 
memory. The format is essentially: `Map<ASID, Map<VA, PA>>`.

In practice, alongside the `PA` component of the inner map above, there is
some value representing levels of permission. i.e. `Map<VA, (PA, Perm)>`.

But there is more in that map. Specifically, there is a binary value `U` that is
`TRUE` if user mode code can access it, and `FALSE` (or 0) if only kernel mode
can. We are left with `Map<ASID, Map<VA, (PA, Perm, U)>>`

**Indirection** is the ability to reference something using a name, reference, or
container instead of the value itself. A flexible **mapping** between a name and
a thing allows change the thing without notifying the holders of the name.

An *example of indirection* is a phone system, where each phone is unique, but we
can reference a phone by a phone number, and if we get a new phone, we just 
transfer the number to the new phone so people don't have to tell everyone they
know that they switched phones. The number just keeps working.

## Address spaces
Let a virtual space be a set of `N = 2^n` virtual addresses, and a physical 
address space have `M = 2^m`. Each byte in memory has *one* physical address, but
zero, one, or *many* virtual addresses.

**Question:** On a 64-bit machine currently running 8 processes, how much virtual
memory is there?

**Answer:** In a 64-bit address space, there are `2^64` possible spaces per
process. Thus, the total space is `8 * 2^64 = 2^67`.

---

**Question:** True of false: A 32-bit machine with 8 Gb of RAM would never use all
of it (in theory). Note: 32 bits can only address 4 Gb of RAM.

**Answer:** False. This would only be true if there was only one process was 
running at once. But with multiple processes, the virtual address space could map
to the entire 8 Gb of RAM

---

CPU addresses can be split into a **virtual page number (VPN)** and 
**page offset**. These are similar to *block numbers* and *block offsets* from the
caching lesson.

A **Page Table (PT)** holds the map that maps from VPN to PPN.

### Using the Page Table
1. Index into the PT using the VPN portion of the VA
2. The PT stores, for each VPN, a **Page Table Entry (PTE)** that includes the
things we need (permissions, user mode access bit, etc.)

---

**NOTE:** A PPN is sometimes refered to as a Page Frame Number (PFN)

---

The VPN has the format `VPN = VA / page_size` and the Offset is 
`Offset = VA % page_size`.

A **flat page table** is a single table with one column containing a binary 
`valid` value and another column containing a physical page number. If the
`valid` value is `1`, the PPN column contains a PPN, and if not, it contains
`null`.

*Key abstraction*: each process has its own virtual address space, so it can view
memory as a simple linear array. This virtual memory does *not* have to be 
linearly contiguous in physical memory.
