# Lecture 3 - Bits, Bytes, Ints
### Memory Space
**Words** are fields of 2/4/8 locations/bytes. 

Intel add **longword** (4) and **quadword** (8) rather than change the meaning of *word*.

**Memory** is an array of numbered locations.

Each memory locations has **space** to store a fixed amount of data.

Memory locations have unique **addresses**.

A **pointer** is the address of a specific memory location.

The address of values larger than a *word* is the address of the first *word* in that space.

An **aligned** address is divisible by its size (*words* are divisible by 2, *longwords* by 4, etc.)

### CPUs and Cores
Modern CPUs have multiple **cores**, each of which can do calculations at the same time. CPUs don't "do calculations," cores do.

### Encoding and representation
Multiple symbolic representations exist for the same number (binary, decimal, hex, etc.)

Digital machines use bits to encode numbers, which is why they use a binary number system.

Because we have insufficent digits in our numbering system, **hexidecimal numbering**  (base-16) adopts letters A through F.

The value of digit `d` at position `n` is (base)^(n-1)

Anything countable, not just numbers, can be stored as bits. This includes, emoji, letters, and others.

### Godel Encoding
**Godel Encoding** is the act of encofing human alphabets as agreed-upon mappings to integers (ASCII, UTF-8, etc.)

### Why multiple integer types?
All values occupy memory space that is finite in total, so we try to limit the number of bytes that each value uses.

If a variable can be represented by fewer bits, we use a different integer type to represent it than if the number is massive and needs more bits.

### Negative numbers
C integers are **signed** by default.

The encoding for negative numbers that we use is **2's complement**.

In 2's complement, the highest-weight bit represents the sign, with `1` being negative and `0` being positive. So signed integers represent valued ranging from **-128 to 128**, while unsigned integers using the same number of bits can represent **0 to 255**.

### Overflow
**Arithmetic Overflow** happens when an operation produces a nuber that is too large for the encoding scheme.

If there needs to be a `1` in a bit that isn't within the memory location that your value is contained in, C simply discards the **carry out bit**, which leaves you with an incorrect number in your code without a warning or error.

### Casting and conversions
C has explicit **type casting** to tell the compiler to change how type of that value. `x = (new_type)y;`

When type casting, the bits are unchanged. They are only interpreted differently.

Conversion from longer to shorter integers **truncates** bits *silently*.

Converting from shorter to longer integers, the leftmost bits are filled with `0`'s.

Can use `U` or `u` to explicitly force unsigned ints. Ex: `0U`, `42917215u`.

### Non-integer numbers
Cannot represent irrational numbers with limited bits.

Humans use scientific notation, and standard representations by machines are based on that scientific notation.

C enables floating point numbers using `float` and `double`.

Machines represent floats using the IEEE floating point standard.

### Endian
The **little endian** is when the address in memory store the least significant bit (LSB) first. In **big endian**, the most significant bit (MSB) is stored/sent first.

Intel x86 and x64 are *little endian*.

Which *endian* a machine uses is arbitrary from the programmers perspective.
