# Lecture 4 - Bitwise Operators, Media, Floats
## Bitwise Operations
The four basic logical operations are `AND`, `OR`, `XOR`, and `NOT`.

Binary bitwise operators are often used with a constant **bitmask** to turn selected bits on or off.

#### Bitmasks
The name **bitmask** comes from looking through a face mask to see the world.

For example, a `00001111` bitmask will reveal the lower four bits of a number and set the higher four to `0` when used with `AND`.

### Bit shift operations
The syntax for shifting bits is `>>` to the right and `<<` to the left.

#### Bit shift example:
```c
0xff << 8 // 0xff00
0xff00 >> 8 // 0xff
```

When shifting bits, any that are shifted *in* are `0`, and any shifted *out* are dropped.

When shifting signed values, accidents are prone to happen and should usually be avoided in this course.

Left shifting by one bit multiplies divides by 2, and right shifting divides by 2.

If the LSB of a number is 0, it's even. If the two least bits are zero, it's divisible 4, etc.

## Playing Card Example
Encode a standard deck of playing cards.

Operations to implement:
- Which is the higher-value card?
- Are they the same suit?

### Options for representation
1. 1 bit per card: bit corresponding to card set to 1, all others are 0. (This is **one-hot** encoding, and isn't very memory-compact and cannot compare suits.

2. 1 bit per suit (4), 1 bit per number (13): 2 bits set. These are a pair of one-hot values. This is more compact that `1.`, but not ideal.

3. Binary encoding of all 52 cards. This only uses 6 bits so it can fit in a byte, but still can't compare suits.

4. Separate binary encoding of suit (2 bits) and value (4 bits). This is ideal. Can compare suits *and* fit everything in a byte.

You can extract suit and face value using bit shifts and bitmasks. For example, if the 2-bit suit encoding is in bits 3 and 4, `00110000` will mask out the suit.

**NOTE:** lecture slide 22 contains C code for extracting these types of encodings.
