# Lecture 5 - Pointers
A **pointer variable** stores the address of a memory location in which a value of a specific type can be stored.

In C, there are **pointer** types (i.e. `int*` is a pointer to an int, `char*` to a character, etc.)

The unary `&` operator obtains a "pointer to".

Unary `*` performs **deference**, which accesses the pointed-to location to work with the value it contains.

---

**NOTE**: The `&` and `*` operators are different when used in unary (pointer-to and dereference operator) and binary (bitwise AND and multiplication).

---

The `assert()` function takes a boolean, and if that boolean is `false`, it crashes the program. This is mostly used for debugging.

A pointer value is an **address**.

Each **byte** has an address.

The unary `&` can only be used alongside an *rvalue*, while unary `*` can be used with an *lvalue* or an *rvalue*.

#### Difference between `*` and `&`
The `*` operator returns the value stored at that location

The `&` operator simply returns the memory address of an *rvalue*

---

### Null pointers, wild pointers, faults
Addresses are numbers, but not every number is an address.

If a pointer value is invalid, a `segfault` is raised. That happens when a bad pointer is dereferenced.

A **wild pointer** isn't what you want it to be, but it does *happen* to be a valid address. This won't raise an error and you may end up operating on data that you didn't intend to change.

A special pointer to `NULL` is guaranteed to `segfault` if used.

### `struct` pointers and `->`
If a variable `r` is a reference to a `struct`, the `->` dereference operator accesses the member fields of a struct through a pointer.

Example:
```c
r->i = val; // assigns val to the i field of struct r
```

### Arrays
C arrays *are* pointers.

The value of an array is the memory address of the first element in that array.

The value `a[i]` is the same thing as `*(a+i)`. But, the latter will move up `t` memory locations where `t = sizeof i`, not the value of `i`.

A `void*` pointer is a type-agnostic pointer, (aka untyped pointer).

### Pointers and pass-by-reference
C uses **pass-by-value** for function arguments, where argument values are *copied* to parameters. Changed values in the function are discarded.

Pointer types enable **pass-by-reference**, and data is access by dereference (`*`, `->`, `[]`). Changes made in this way are retained after the function concludes.

Since arrays are always pass-by-reference, it's usually best to also pass in the size of the array to avoid overloading.

### Double indirection with `**`
The `**` syntax marks a pointer to another pointer, and is often called a **handle**.

A handle value may either be *valid* (when it points to an object called a **referent**), or *empty* (when it is `NULL`).

Handles to value `x` are used to check if `x` is empty or valid, set `x` to refer to something else, or access/update/move/remove `x`.

### Command line arguments
`argv` is an array of strings (array of `char*`), and `argc` is how many strings are in `argv`.
