# Lecture 6 - Programs, Processes, and Debugging
The debugger we use is `gdb`.

A **debugger** lets a programmer control and inspect your process. The OS notifies the debugger of process events (e.g. `segfault`) so it can intervene.

To run the debugger, use something like `gdb ./myProgram` after compiling with the `-g` flag.

### What is a program?
From a C point of view, a **program** is a closed set of instructions for every referenced **symbol** S, where each S is a valid function or an external variable.

**Consider three representations of a program** 
1. *Source:* a set of C source files
2. *Object:* a set of object files and libraries
3. *Executable:* a "binary" file that represents machine code and data and is ready to be copied into memory and execute.

**Independent compilation** is how projects spanning multiple source files are compiled.

**Build systems** (like `make`) are collections of utilities that do all of the processing and transformation to turn source code into binaries that the machine runs.

Build systems consist of **compilers**, **assemblers**, **linkers**, and **loaders**.

The **pre-processor** is called by the compiler and runs before the compiler. It replaces one string with another for purposes like `#define`

### Make
Make reads a `makefile` to run any number of programs in the shell to assist with build automation. 

### What's in an object file/executable
An object file/executable contains the following sections:
- header
- text (program instructions)
- immuntable data (constant pool)
- global/static data
- symbol table
- relocation data

### The linker
The linux linker is called **ld** (LD in lowercase)

Linkers resolve all references, concatenates required address spaces, and outputs an executable file.

### Libraries
A **static library** is just a collection of object files bundled together into a single **archive** file.

The **ar** utility creates and updates archive files.

### Running a program
When a program launches, the OS initializes a **process** with a **virtual memory** for running program's code and data. It creates a **map** of the virtual memory and initializes a CPU core with the VM map to run the process.

The map that the OS creates to manage virtual memory is the **memory map**.

Maps are created by the OS *kernel*. No process can access another's map, nor can a process leave its own map.

### Process address space
The program uses memory through its process **virtual address space (VAS)** 

Process address space is partitioned into logical **segments** with distict purpose and use.

If you reference a memory address outside of a valid segment, a `segmentation fault` is raised.

**Static segments** in the PAS are code text and global data.

**Dynamid segments** are the stack and heap (covered later) 

**Dynamic libraries** are used because many libraries are used by multiple programs. Instead of loading many copies of the library for each program, it is stored once and referenced by each program individually.

