# Lecture 7 - Dynamic Memory Allocation/Linked Structures
### Space Allocation
The **stack** is the space for procedure calls and local variables. It shrinks as procedures return.

The **heap** is for other dynamic/temporary data object, but may be longer-lived than items in the stack.

**Static allocation** is a fixed amount of space that is assigned at compile time and cannot grow or shrink.

**Implicit allocation** is automatic, and is filled and emptied as space is demanded and no longer needed, like with local variables. This is done in the stack.

**Explicit allocation** is done by the program using `malloc`. This is done in the heap.

Uninitialized variables are automatically filled with zeroes, so to avoid letting them take up program memory, they are stored in `.bss` files outside of the dynamic memory space.

**Stack-allocated data** has a known and temporary lifetime and is deallocated on `return`

**Dynamic ("heap") data** specifies data sizes at runtime and manually allocates and deallocates.

The only two scopes in C are **global** and **local**.

### Malloc
The `malloc` procedure allocates a block of space of a given number of bytes, for example:
```C
myPtr = (int*)malloc(10 * sizeof(int));
```
Note, you have to tell `malloc` what type to cast to (`int*` in the above example).

There are two related functions to `malloc`: `calloc` and `realloc`. 

`calloc` zeroes out the memory when allocating, which is more computationally expensive but gets rid of garbage

`realloc` tries to change the size of a previously allocated block. This could prove computationally expensive due to the need to copy all of the data.

The `free` function released the block of memory pointed to by `malloc` and its peers.

### Heap manager
The C API has `malloc`, `free`, and the like. These procedures make up the **heap manager** module.

A **memory leak** is when we neglect to call `free` and inadvertently prevent the reuse of space.

A **dead pointer** happens when attempting to use a block of memory after `free` has been called on it.

To check for memory leaks, we use a software tool called **Valgrind**.

**NOTE FOR CLASS**: Valgrind produces *vgcore* files. Don't push these to git or gradescope with reject the submission.

