# Lecture 8 - Code as Bits pt.1
The **Instruction Set Architecture (ISA)** defines:
- the system's *state* (program counter, registers, memory)
- The *instruction* types the CPU can execute and the *binary representations* 
of the instructions
- The *effect* that each instruction has on the system state

**Architecture** is an abstract programming model of the processor

**Microarchitecture** is an implementation of the architecture (cache size, core
frequency, digital logic design)

**Machine code** is the byte-level programs that a processor executes

**Assembly code** is the text representation of machine code

**Parallelism** uses extra logic area to compute in parallel with different parts
of the chip.

**Instruction-level parallelism** is hidden from a programmer and is when a single
core has multiple instructions "in flight" at once.

**Multi-core chips** are exposed to the programmer, and allows programmers to
manually leverage concurrency.

### ASM beginnings
ASM is made of mnemonic **opcodes** that describe what the operation is doing

Each instruction has 1-2 operands named **registers**

`MOV*` can access memory at an address in the register

### Instruction set philosophies
**Complex instruction set computing (CISC)** adds more and more elaborate and
specialized instructions as needed. This has more tools for programmers to use,
but hardware has to be able to handle them.

**Reduced instruction set computing (RISC)** keeps an instruction set small and
regular. It's usually easier to build fast hardware with, but programmers have to
implement complex instruction using simpler ones.

### Machine code view
The **Program Counter (PC)** holds the address of the next instruction to be
executed.

**Condition codes** store status information about the most recent arithmetic or
logical operation. This is used for conditional branching.

### Registers
**Registers** are fast storage in the CPU for a small amount of data. They *are
not* in memory and don't have addresses. 

Registers are accessed in a single clock cycle.

Instructions name registers directly.

Careful use of registers reduces the need to access memory, since accessing 
memory is slower than accessing registers.

*If you need it later, store it in a register (if possible)* 

Code needs conventions for how to use registers. The **Application binary
interface** establishes this convention.

### Instruction types
1. **Transfer Data** between memory and register. We load data from mamory with 
`%reg = Mem[address]`
2. **Store Data** from register to memory with `Mem[address] = %reg`
3. Perform **arithmetic operations** on register or memory data.
4. **Control flow** decides what code executes next.

### Moving data
The general form of moving data takes the form `mov_source, destination` where
the missing letter `_` is the size specifier. 

Size specifiers are `b, w, l, q` for bytes, words, longs, and quads respectively.

Moving data is more of a copy than a move.

---

Moving data in C:
```C
*dest = t; // store t in address pointed to by dest
```
---

In assembly:
```ASM
movq &rax, (%rbx)
```
This moves an 8-byte (quad) value to memory.

---

In machine code:
```
0x40059e: 48 89 03
```
This is what the processor itself interprets on the hardware.

---

### Memory addressing modes
The general format for memory addressing is `D(Rb,Ri,S)`, where:

- `D` isa constant displacement value that is constant and known at compile time
- `Rb` is a base register, which can be any register
- `Ri` is an index register, which can be any register except `%rsp`
- `S` is (1,2,4, or 8)

This gives rise to the general addressing mode: `Mem[Reg[Rb]+(Reg[Ri]*S)+D`

[This link](https://godbolt.org/z/dnzWsx469) has a sample C program and it
corresponding assembly code that swaps two variables.

### LEA Instruction
The **Load Effective Address** instruction `leaq src, dst` does not place things
in memory, but calculates what the address in memory *would be* if it did so, and
loads that address into `%rax`

LEA example:
```
leaq 8(%rds,%rcx,4),%rax
```

### Concepts for use in Lab 8
Function arguments passed in registers `f(%rdi, %rsi)`

Function return in register `%rax` (or `%eax`)

Data movement and arithmetic instructions

Arithmetic instruction operands reside in a register

There is a *maximum of one memory operand per instruction*. If you want to add two
numbers in memory, at least one has to be put in a register first.

### Operand combinations
*Cannot do memory-to-memory transfers with a singe instruction.* First, we have to
load into the register from memory with one instruction, then we do whatever
operations and then place that value in memory.


